---
title: "The Future of Small."
categories:
  - blog
tags:
  - quantum computing
  - quantum
---

If you type 'quantum computing' into Google, 175 million results pop up in (if you've got slow Internet like me) less than half a second. Touted as the future of information and optimisation technologies, reports estimate the industry could generate a trillion dollars annually by 2050 as significant investment continues to be attracted from tech giants including IBM, Google, and Intel to name a few. Yet for the majority of netizens for whom a smartphone, tablet, or PC is more than enough to allow full participation into 21st century society, will this shift in computing actually revolutionise our daily lives?

First off, it is useful to know what quantum computing actually is. In straightforward terms, quantum mechanics is a branch of physics that deals with the behaviour of atomic and subatomic matter. This includes protons and neutrons that make up an atom’s nucleus, and electrons that are located in the nucleus’ surrounding shells. Physicists working at these quantum scales in the late 18th and early 19th centuries observed that matter at this level would interact illogically, in ways deemed physically impossible for macroscopic objects obeying the laws of classical mechanics.

One such example of this unique behaviour is demonstrated in the 1927 discovery of ‘quantum tunnelling’, a phenomenon whereby a proton or electron can appear on the opposite side of an energy barrier acting as a wave instead of a solid particle. Put simply, this would be like moving through a solid wall. This is not the only unique behaviour that such particles possess: superposition, entanglement, and interference are complex properties that act outside of the confines of classical mechanics. It is these key properties that are essential to the running of quantum computers; however, before we dive into the complicated physics behind the concept of quantum computing itself, let’s take a look at how computers actually work, quantum or not.

Traditional or classical computers are computers that store and process data using numerical binary codes made up of 1s and 0s. As these computers are built from billions of silicon transistors (switches) that can either be activated on (1) or off (0), these binary codes are essentially a set of instructions that the Computer Processing Unit (CPU) (essentially the brain of the computer) can carry out, turning specific transistors on and off to complete a task. The smallest unit of data in computing, represented numerically as either 1 or 0, is known as a binary digit’ or ‘bit’: a group of eight adjacent bits becomes a ‘byte’. For example, 10110101 represents eight bits, or one byte, with each 1 meaning ‘on’, and each 0 meaning ‘off’. A CPU receiving this binary code would therefore activate the silicon transistors that make up a computer’s electric circuits in the appropriate manner to carry out these instructions.

So far, so good. Bits, bytes, binary: it’s not too complicated. So why fix what’s not broken? Well, in this form of computing, bits can be either 1 or 0, never both. That is the crux of a binary system – everything is one or the other. Yet this means that in classical computing, the binary codes that are sent to a CPU have to be read one-by-one in the given order to carry out a specific task. This can lead to problems with efficiency when trying to solve cumbersome calculations with vast data sets. Take the Travelling Salesman Problem. A salesman is trying to find the shortest route between all the cities in a given area, before returning back to the original city. In classical computing, the binary nature of the system means that to find their solution, each route would be identified and tested before the shortest route is found. This could take a minute or a million years, depending on the number of cities: the task will be completed, but not efficiently.

Enter quantum computers. These circuits are made up of ‘quantum bits’, or ‘qubits’, which are the basic unit of information within the computer, acting as the classical bit’s quantum counterpart. While several types of quantum computers exist, one of the most established is the model that uses electrons to encode the 1s and 0s that we saw with classical computers. These values are stored through what’s known as the electrons ‘spin state’, where ‘spin up’ represents 1, and ‘spin down’ represents 0.

However, what sets qubits apart from classical bits is that qubits can be both 1 and 0. This brings us back to one of the quantum concepts mentioned earlier – superposition – which defines that quantum particles can exist in multiple states at the same time1. To keep things relatively uncomplicated, for complex and multifaceted calculations, qubits can draw on this superposition to represent all possible values, and so all possible computational scenarios. Revisiting the Travelling Salesman, if a quantum computer was applied to solve this problem, rather than checking each route consecutively one-by- one, it could look through all the possible routes all at once, at a rate that grows exponentially with the number of qubits in the system.

To achieve this improved processing power however, all the qubits in the system must be somehow linked up, working with each other. This introduces the second crucial quantum property that quantum computers possess – the principle of ‘entanglement’. This is the phenomenon of two (or more) qubits being correlated to one another, no matter the distance between them. Furthermore, two qubits could be entangled in such a way that measuring the state of one will always display the opposite value of the other. For example, if one qubit in an entangled pair is measured to have the value 1, we will know with certainty that the other one has the value 0.

In a quantum computer, this means that measuring the state of one qubit reveals the state of its entangled other, allowing two pieces of information to be gleaned from one qubit. Entanglement can therefore be used as a sort of computational multiplier for qubits: entangling more and more qubits together allows the ability of the system to make calculations explode. Moreover, changing the state of an entangled qubit will change the state of the paired qubit immediately, allowing the exchange of quantum information at a distance. Several further applications have been cited as being able to benefit from this qubit entanglement, such as quantum cryptography whereby secure channels may be able to be created through two entangled systems that are correlated and change with each other.

Why this subatomic entanglement happens... is unknown. Einstein even labelled the phenomenon as “spooky things at a distance”. Nevertheless, the phenomenon has been proven, with the University of Glasgow even snapping a picture of two entangled electrons in 2019. However, these entangled states are highly fragile, and can easily be destroyed by unwanted interference from the external environment. This is why building a quantum computer requires so much effort and investment: a perfectly controlled environment where entangled states between large numbers of qubits can be created without any interference, must be built. One way of ensuring this is by maintaining qubits at a near zero Kelvin state, to prevent any disruptive movement within the system, a necessary but expensive project.

So, at the end of all of this, what’s in it for you, me, the everyday netizen? Well, in terms of day-to-day life, our PCs aren’t going to suddenly be replaced with quantum computers. In fact, this is highly unlikely to happen at all, as quantum computers are only suited for specific tasks that have lots of moving parts. With classical computations, the procedure is much more simple: an input is provided, algorithmically processed, and an output given. This style of computing is ideal for binary models, so to use a quantum computer for the mundane tasks such as email, spreadsheets, or immersion into the world of Netflix or TikTok... would simply be using the wrong tool.

However, anything with a significant number of variables that has considerable optimisation needs – this is where quantum computing takes the reign. From journey planning and air traffic control to data encryption and AI development, quantum computers will be able to test many millions of scenarios and protect quantum-stored information in ways that would either take classical computers thousands, if not millions of years, or simply wouldn’t be able to achieve.

One especially pertinent direction for quantum technologies is in the field of medicine and drug discovery. A vast number of molecular proteins and compounds are tested in rigorous drug trials, which take years, if not decades, to be fully explored and approved. With quantum computing, infinite combinations of said compounds can be analysed and simulated in a fraction of the time that would be normally taken, due to the exponential processing power that is harnessed. Synthesising quantum computation with the rapidly progressing fields of machine learning and image analysis would further expedite the diagnosis of illness and disease across healthcare. Finally, the growing interest in ‘precision medicine’ whereby tailored prevention and treatment approaches are being investigated, is likely to benefit from quantum computing being able to grapple with the complexity of the human body.

Whilst quantum computing presently remains to many a mysterious, even quasi-magical expansion into the realm of hypermodern and sci-fi technologies, as the science and engineering continues to progress rapidly, very real differences will be seen across the lives of everyday individuals. From journey planning as seen with the Travelling Salesman, to vastly improved healthcare from expedited drug trialling and delivery, quantum computing may not ever be in the business of replacing your iPhone or Android, but that doesn’t mean it won’t change your life.

Although we’re a few years away from these applications becoming mainstream, there are hopes that by 2030, such expectations can become a reality as the number of universities, think-tanks, and companies invested in quantum computing continue to expand. IBM Research, a leader in the field, is planning on releasing four new quantum processers between now and 2025, alongside Google’s trajectory of spending several billion dollars to build a quantum computer by 2029 that can perform large-scale business and scientific calculations without errors. Far from just another hype, this is an industry that won’t be slowing down any time soon.

1A qubit’s value, whether it is 1 or 0, can be encoded in several different ways, but one method is achieved through knowing the qubit’s ‘spin state’. The spin state is derived from the qubit’s own magnetic properties, as it will either align against its polarised surroundings, known as ‘spin up’ (1), or with them, known as ‘spin down’ (0). However, the qubit only settles or ‘collapses’ into these spin up/spin down basis states when it is being measured (another phenomenon unique to quantum mechanics). Before this point, the qubit will spin in every which way possible at any one time within this magnetic field: the qubit exists in a superposition of being spin up and spin down. And it is this superposition third state that gives quantum computers their uniquely powerful capabilities.
