The perception of tattoos throughout Western history is not a myopic interpretation of disgust, despite academic and popular literature impressions (Atkinson, 2004). Appreciating how acceptance has oscillated across this period grounds the practice within subcultural and Orientalist discourses. Furthermore, understanding the dynamic production and consumption of tattooing raises questions regarding individual and social identities that form in relation to the process and product, troubling notions of subculturalism through redefinitions of community and individual agency.

Embedded with colonial themes of racialisation and Othering, tattoos resurged within 18th century Europe with the return of Captain James Cook from Polynesia, accompanied by native ‘specimens’ wearing extensive tribal tattoos (Werner, 2005). Aristocratic European society held a fascinated horror with the tattooed body, corporealising imaginative geographies of the exotic Other (Said, 1979). Despite this initial popularity, the proliferation of exoticised entertainment through ethnic shows and ‘habitat exhibits’ across Europe and North America, such as the display of tattooed Tahitian communities (Werner, 2005) fetishized the tattooed body as primitive and ‘freakish’ (Kerchy and Zittlau, 2012). Tattoos were simultaneously exonerated or demonised through structures of class and social background, as well as position in colonial worlds as either subject or oppressor.

The short-lived rise of beachcombing in the late 18th century, where white European sailors returned from living amongst Polynesian communities adorned with tribal tattoos, uncovered the vulnerability of whiteness, rendering such bodies as liminal figures; many such beachcombers went on to earn their living through performing in side shows as ‘made freaks’ (Fordham, 2007; Cummings, 2003), cementing their marginalised status. Through subverting white, unblemished ideals, tattoos became associated with the ‘underbelly of society’ (Gilman, 1985).

Pathlogisation of the body in the early 20th century alongside the positivist revolution (Pitts, 1999) shifted associations of tattooed individuals from exotic to criminal and mentally unstable (Lombroso, 1911). Studies of tattooed males in psychiatric wards and prisons (Gittleson et al. 1969), reaffirmed public conceptions of tattoos as degenerate and abnormal (Foucault, 1977). Tattoos became symbols of societal outcasts, affiliated with deviant bodies such as the military, gang members and prisoners (Kosut, 2006)- traditionally male dominated groups, thus masculinising the tattoo and promoting aggressive associations. They were even made illegal across parts of the US, such as New York City in 1961, reaffirming such associations.

Defiance to norms of unblemished skin (Irwin, 2003) has encouraged many marginal groups to celebrate tattooing as a sign of resistance and collective identity. Post-War discontent left communities, especially working-class youths, at economic and societal margins eager to materialise their own collectives (Hall and Jefferson, 1993; Steward et al., 1990). Figures 4 and 5 demonstrate how indelible ink became an expressive functionality of multiple subcultures from anti-establishment Punks to working-class Skinhead solidarity, indicating a heterogeneous tattoo community encompassing pluralised associations of adversity.  

Alongside these discourses of deviance and resistance, attitudes towards tattoos began to widen throughout the latter half of the 20th century. The ‘Tattoo Renaissance’ that indicated tattooing’s revival was pioneered by artists in the 1950s and 1970s. American tattooist Don Ed Hardy was one such figure, widely credited with pioneering modern tattoo styles such as neo-Japanese works from studying in Japan under tattoo master Horihide in 1973, indicating a modernising shift in the way Orientalist practices of acquisition were carried out under discourses of globalisation and creative hybridisation (Yamada, 2009). Tattoo styles began diversifying, becoming avant-garde through Japanese, single-needle and tribal styles rather than fixating on bold Traditional American or scripture,  encouraging personal agency and creative expression regarding the unlimited choice of tattoo style individuals now possessed.

Employing the body as a canvas reinforced associations with creativity and subjectivity where tattoos became increasingly considered extensions of the self, troubling modernist private and public binaries (Baudrillard, 1998). This expansion into the realm of the self within the context of neoliberalising shifts occurring across Western societies was instrumental in generating a heterogeneous community of tattoo enthusiasts, where traditional boundaries between the normative and controversial, as well as the consumer and authentic identity, became vulnerable to negotiation as barriers to tattooing became permeable. However, assuming all bodies as equally able to access this individuality problematically rejects understandings of agency as shaped by traditional and structural axes, as well as posits tattooing as a creative Western revival rather than addressing the histories of Orientalism and Othering embedded within the ink.

In the last three decades, the tattoo industry has experienced rising popularity. Individuals traditionally distanced from the marginalised ‘tattoo community’ (Pitts, 2003), including the middle-classes, professionals and women (Irwin, 2001; 2003), are becoming inked. Climbing popularity has been attributed to greater tattoo ‘sanitisation’, accessibility to tattoo removal, and positive media and trend-setting through celebrity influence (Velliquette et al., 1998), but the shifting mindset of society towards individualism and employing personal agency demonstrates how the relationship between subcultural capital, conceptualisations of authenticity and tattooing is changing.

The very labelling of tattoos as subversive to conventional society is what subcultural scholars such as Hebdige (1979) argue to be part of the sequence of the ‘incorporation’ of subcultures into the mainstream (Heath and Potter, 2006), where confrontation becomes conformation, and rebellion is redefined as fashion. However, using neoliberal framings, it is imperative to reflect how tattoos evolved into reflections of the individualism within contemporary Western society rather than static repurposed symbols of mediated and neutralised insurgence by dominant society. Tattoos are valuable as they inhabit a unique position within subcultural discourses, troubling boundaries against mainstream norms and blurring distinctions between authentic and consumer capital (Thornton, 1996). Using subcultural and post-subcultural theorist frameworks, the changes in how tattooing is experienced and worlded into existence by diverse and heterogeneous bodies draws attention to the non-static and plural nature of tattoos as symbolic, as creative expression, as a worlding practice, as a consumer aesthetic, natures that can be engaged with simultaneously and/or separately, individually and/or collectively. 
