---
title: "Over 150,000 Killed: Why is the World Ignoring Sudan?"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Sudan
  - War
  - Human Rights
---

Ukraine is stricken by war. Gaza faces near-total devastation from relentless Israeli bombardment. Los Angeles, gripped by flames, is seeing thousands made homeless overnight. And the looming spectre of Donald Trump’s return to power, now only days away. These stories have filled our news channels and For You pages for the last 12 months - and rightly so, critical in keeping the powers that be accountable for their actions, if not right now then at least in the hopefully near future. But in a world of constant doomscrolling, Sudan’s anguish barely registers, with scant reporting and laissez-faire attention on the mechanics of a war that is choke-holding the region and its people. 

The global appetite for tragedy is insatiable - a macabre voyeurism fed by dark headlines and distant suffering. So with an estimated 150,000 lives lost and over 11 million displaced, what is causing the world to turn away from Sudan?

#### The Weight of Anti-Blackness

Back in November, a member of the protest group London for Sudan spoke to my partner Afeefa and me about this very issue. Having assembled a small but powerful demonstration outside the Emirates stadium, a gutsy move given the Liverpool-induced temperament of Arsenal fans, principle organiser Lulu voiced a hard truth: that Sudan’s invisibility is rooted in anti-Blackness.

“Just Africans fighting again,” she said, distilling the dismissiveness of the narratives that permeate mainstream media and government agendas. A stark reflection of how the violence in Sudan is trivialised, her words stuck like a slap.

Anti-Blackness - the systemic devaluation and marginalisation of Black lives - is nothing new. Attributed to issues of racial empathy bias, the idea that we implicitly see the pain of others when our skin tones are more similar, and the fact that Western news outlets with a predominantly white audience are not drawing due attention to Sudan’s current crisis begins to make unfortunate sense. In this cruel arithmetic, Sudan’s plight is deemed unworthy of column inches or prime-time urgency.

Moreover, the problem of anti-Blackness runs deep: Western indifference to Sudan’s pain is compounded by its unwillingness to confront its own complicity, where decades of British and Egyptian colonial rule left a fractured Sudan, its independence in 1956 birthing fault lines of ethnic, regional, religious, and political strife. It is these legacies of global meddling and lack of accountability that leave Sudan’s suffering dismissed as a mere inevitability, another chapter in a tired story of African conflict.

#### Power Struggles and Proxys 

Yet the conflict gripping Sudan today is distinct - something that governments across the world consistently fail to recognise, due to the powerful new players in the game.

On April 15, 2023, the threads holding Sudan together snapped. The Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF), led by General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, clashed with the paramilitary Rapid Support Forces (RSF), commanded by General Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, known as Hemedti. Two factions who once cooperated to oust dictator Omar al-Bashir in 2019, these allies became enemies through a struggle for power; and what was meant to herald a civilian-led future devolved into a bitter war.

While it is easy to simply label the war as a struggle between two power-hungry generals, conflict is increasingly entangled with international interests. Egypt has supplied arms to the SAF, while the UAE has funnelled weapons to the RSF, reportedly via Chad. Libya and South Sudan, though not officially aligned, have seen fuel flows reach the RSF. Eritrea is hosting training camps for SAF-affiliated armed groups, and even Ukrainian special forces are allegedly engaging RSF fighters alongside Russian mercenaries. 

This international meddling complicates an already devastating war - extending the violence far beyond the three months that citizens were anticipating. Believing both sides lacked the funding and resources for a prolonged conflict, many civilians stayed put in their homes to wait out the war. However, on a shaky video call from Sudan, Duaa Ibrahim, an architecture student at Khartoum University, described how the involvement of foreign actors providing funds and weapons to the RSF ultimately upended her and her family’s lives.

“We tried to stay as long as we could, we thought that the war would end, but during these five months, there were people being killed, and a lot of checkpoints where citizens are imprisoned… it was difficult to live there.

“Suddenly the soldiers were just everywhere with a lot of powerful weapons. They war against the citizens, and a lot of them are not even Sudanese, we don't know from where they come. I'm not a specialist, but as a citizen, I'm sure there is something going on.”

It is testimonies such as Duaa's that are crucial in revealing the role of foreign actors in drawing out the conflict. 

#### The Risks of Oversimplification

Nevertheless, while the term ‘proxy war’ may help outsiders contextualise the conflict by framing it as part of broader geopolitical rivalries (such as those between the UAE and Iran or the UAE and Saudi Arabia), labelling Sudan a battleground for global rivalries risks oversimplifying the issue, becoming a way to scapegoat understanding what is happening in Sudan as complex and difficult to follow (narratives, for example, that have haunted Palestine as a way to disengage with the origins and continuation of the conflict).

Defining Sudan’s conflict through this narrow lens obscures nuances that are crucial in the journey towards accountability. For example, Egypt and the UAE, the two main external backers of the SAF and RSF respectively, maintain close ties despite supporting opposing factions; their involvement in Sudan is therefore not indicative of a direct rivalry, but of strategic calculations that are rooted in their own regional interests. 

Moreover, neither the SAF nor the RSF are mere proxies executing the agendas of their backers. Both factions are waging a brutal war for control over Sudan, exploiting international support as a tool to advance their own ambitions, regardless of the devastating impact on the country and its people. 

As such, recognising the ongoing war in Sudan as an interplay between international interests and domestic power struggles is crucial to move beyond reductive labels, and confront the intertwined roles of local and international actors in perpetuating this tragedy.

#### A War Left to Burn

What makes this war so insidious isn’t just its violence - it’s the silence that surrounds it. The conflict drags on, sustained by a cocktail of greed, desperation, and global indifference; and Sudan and its people choke under the weight of a war that millions are trying to escape. It’s not just a failure of empathy; it’s a failure of accountability. 

The war doesn't lack horror. What it lacks is an audience.
